OK in this lesson we are going to explore the use of facts hook.
Now the use of fact took is going to be different from the use state hook and what the use of facts
hook does is it gives us the ability to fire side effects inside of our functional components by before
we explore what that means.
Let's just look at what we are trying to build so that we know what we're doing with this use effector.
So right now we have some input and depending on the name that you type into this input we're going
to make an API request to our J sign place holder to get some specific user in this user list by the
name of this user specifically the user name.
So if we look at the code we haven't written it yet but the structure of the H2 AML is that we have
some simple input and right now all we've done is we've leveraged the use state hook that we just learned.
So this is a good chance also for us to continue looking at both hooks in unison but also for us to
see how you stay hooked might be used in a real world application.
Now we have some user object that we're setting with our set user right these two parameters that we
get back from use state so we're calling you state for this use our state value that we want and the
default value will be no.
But what we expect to get back of course is some object.
The next thing we're going to set is this query.
Right so our search query what the user types and what their input.
And here we're going to set our set search query value as well.
So when you state default value is Brett whenever the user type something different that will be the
new string value that's going to be in our search query state.
The main difference is that instead of sending this as a default value of an empty string we set it
as Brett.
And that's why when we refresh we get Brett right here.
So now before we actually proceed with the use effect all we have done is that in our input we set our
value to our search query value.
Right.
So we're leveraging internal state.
And then whenever this value changes we get the target and the value itself and then put it into our
search query value using the search search query property.
Now if a user exists and it's not now.
Right.
We just simply display a div and show the name user name and email.
Otherwise if user is null we just show a p tag that says no user found in order for us to leverage our
use affect hook.
We've got to bring it in first and then we got to put it into our component.
Now use effect is different from you state in the sense that it does not get back any value.
Instead what it does is it gets a function that gets called when ever the component changes or whenever
the component updates and re renders so let me show you what this means.
Let's say we have some function that console logs Hello.
That's all it does when our component mounts for the first time this effect will fire the one that we
just passed here because this is mimicking our component did mount lifecycle method.
So the effect fires but it will also fire as we notice when ever our component reenters.
And the reason our component renders is because we're firing off our set search query method which is
similar to calling set state as you remember in a class component whenever you call set state the render
method gets called.
So just like that method are used state does a similar thing when ever any of our set parameters from
our use state gets called it does re render and update the component as a result the use effect affects
will also fire.
So that's the thing to remember is that our use effect is not just for mounting is not just for mimicking
component did mount lifecycle methods but also for any of the Update lifecycle methods that fire when
ever render gets called.
Now you might be wondering well what if we don't want to fire our use effect method on every update.
What if we only want to fire it in a way that's similar to component did mount Well the way we would
do that is we would pass in a secondary parameter to use effect now this secondary parameter will be
an array and what this array takes is properties that this affects has access to that will not trigger
a rerun under.
So for example if inside of here we only want to trigger a use affects re render.
If our search query value changes right then we will see that of course we're re rendering our effect
right because our search create property has changed.
But let's say we only wanted to fire when our user property changed one.
Now we'll see that we're no longer getting the effect right.
It only fires the first time when are actual component mounted because the user stake here this value
was brand new.
That's the thing to keep in mind this array is taking an array of properties that we want to watch and
our effect only fires.
If those properties ever change and usually we want to in such a way so that these properties are going
to be properties that our function our use affects function is dependent on.
So we'll talk about this once we actually implement the feature.
But if for example we want it only our effects of fire simply the one time when it mounted we passed
in an empty array because what we're saying is that I want this effect to depend on nothing only.
So if this array is saying only render are use effect again whenever anything in this array property
wise changes if it's an empty array then we're not watching for anything.
So no matter what changes are use effect does not fire again because it's not firing at all unless anything
changes.
And because we're not watching anything right then we don't care.
So now we of course fire the first time but then we don't fire for any subsequent changes.
How do we actually do our fetch.
Well if we were to use our async await function you would probably think that what we should do is write
an async function but if we do this we'll actually see that we do get an error and the error is that
the effect function must not return anything besides what is used for cleanup.
Now there's two caveats here to look at.
The first is that the effect function must not return anything but the function.
What does this mean.
Well the function that we pass to use affect async functions actually return us an async func object.
So what this is saying is that when we declare our async func method we're actually returning back an
async func object which use effect does not want.
So how do we actually use an async await function in our use effects function.
Well what we would do is return a function that returns our async function.
So here we can return a function and then set a new fetch func which is equal to async await loops which
is where we'll perform our fetch.
So here's what we'll do.
We are going to call R a wait for fetching to our Jason Place holder string because we're trying to
get the user and we're going to say where the name or let's say the user name equals.
And then here we're going to use our property of search query so essentially what the user types in
right here.
I'm using the wrong string.
So we're doing string interpolation and we want to set this equal to our response.
Next what we want to do is we want to convert this to Jason.
Jason equals response start.
Jason we want to await this as well.
Now the thing to remember here is what we get back from this.
You are l will be an array.
So even if we do let's say we want Brett if we do users karma user name equals Brett we see that this
is still an array so we always want the first object.
So here's what we're gonna do we are simply going to say course we're going to set our user right when
we get this Jason object back and we're gonna pluck the first user and then inside of this function
we're just going to call our fetch but we're not going to actually return it.
We're just going to call it and now what will happen is that we will so let's actually get rid of that
first right.
Because I need to point out something we will pretty much just save this.
And what will happen is that when our component mounts we are going to call this fetch funk method which
will fetch from the Jason based on the search query.
It'll give us back the response we converted Jason.
And then we call that user but what happens when we save this if we look we're actually going to see
if I console log this
we see that we're going crazy.
We keep firing this over and over and over and over again.
Why is that.
Well that's something we have to understand about the way that this used effect works what's happening
is that we are firing off this effect whenever the component gets re rendered.
Right or the component updates but our component updates whenever we set the state and we set the state
we're setting our user state.
When ever this value comes in whenever a user comes in.
So what happens is that the component mounts for the first time we fetch from this euro using the bread
state we get back our object and then we set our user which in turn really renders our component and
then triggers our effect again.
And then we researched for the user reset the response reset the value right calling that state again
and then this triggers another render and onwards and onwards and upwards and onwards ours because we
keep setting the user inside of our effect so because of this this is a thing we have to watch out for
and explicitly why they give us this array because what we're trying to say in this array is that I
want you to watch for properties that I have I might have access to inside of my function that only
if that value changes will I then update this effect if that property doesn't change that I don't want
to re fire this effect.
Now one way that we can do this is of course if we just pass in this empty string outside this empty
array if I save we fire for the first time.
But now the effect doesn't fire again right.
No matter what even if I change this.
Right.
You see that nothing is happening well this is pretty much how we would mimic a component did mount
method to fetch code by passing an empty array but we want to trigger a change when ever we type anything
in so the way for us to do that is we simply say whenever the search query value changes then I want
you to actually refire this effect.
So now if I type you'll see that we're updating and if I were to choose another user then we are able
to update our state with our new user.
So this is pretty much the main thing of use effect is just how we have to be careful of what properties
we're using inside of the function that we pass use a fact that may cause an infinite loop inside of
our component or how we can use it in order to fire and represent our component did mount methods but
this is pretty much it.
Now they're pretty simple when you look at them but they are very complicated in how we can utilize
them to replace features in our application so let's actually use what we've learned with you state
and use effect to replace some of the features inside of our clothing application and we'll do that
in the next lesson.